I'm Dave Lane from the Open Education Resource Foundation based in Dunedin, New Zealand.

To me, "equality" in the context of education means "the same for everyone" or "one size fits all". That's the past of education, not the future we envision.

Nature and nurture imbue us with two of the three necessities of learning: attitude and aptitude - these we hold within. We are then equipped to grasp the third necessity: opportunity, if we can find it.

Equity is equality one step removed. In higher education, equity is equality of opportunity. Today, too many experience inequity. So what can we do?

The Internet is a global copying machine. It's disruption threatens - and is being fought at every turn by - existing fortunes, by old, closed thinking. I think I hear the dinosaurs roaring.

Some of us see an opportunity to adapt instead. The Internet offers us something completely new: suddenly small distributed but dedicated groups, using free and open tools, can reach a global audience while requiring remarkably few resources.

Open-minded kindred spirits from all over the world work out in the open collaboratively, assembling the building blocks of an open higher education. They employ ideas and tools which have never been marketed to them by corporations. They are excited, inspired, and effective. Who would have thought we would create a rich, open educational ecosystem for all to discover, without anyone being separated from either their autonomy or dignity. Perhaps wikis are the petrie dishes of modern education.

With our partners, we are pioneering education freely available to all. Only assessment for real credentials comes at a fair and reasonable cost. Our model removes the tyranny of geography and personal circumstance.

No longer need potential lie unrealised, ambitions be fustrated, genius fizzle unexpressed. Our collective goal is to remedy inequity of opportunity, not with a pale copy of what exists, but with something new. By combining the Internet, OERs, and a deep commitment to the principles of open, the OERu will deliver nothing less than global,  individualised, self-service equity-in-education.


---
Snippets

Individual minds move in their own direction, the direction in which they are inclined. Not on the same inclination.

Rather than nuggets, fries, and a coke, we are creating the higher learning equivalent of a home made care package, made to order, carrying with it the love and best wishes of a dedicated and welcoming community.

Learning and teaching require sharing. "Open" removes barriers to sharing, glass ceilings, and steel floors. With open we follow our curiosity, explore. Rather than sharing, "closed" is a tease, luring us in with a sales pitch saturated with "easy" then it holds out its hand, rubs its fingers... we either pay for limited access, or it shuts the door.

Like Email, Equality is just quality updated for the digital era. Equity is like Equality, but with a stake, with a sense of ownership. Education is what ductile minds are naturally inclined to do, to explore themselves given the opportunity. In the Nature vs. Nurture debate, the most obvious external is opportunity - that part is not innate. That's where the OERFoundation comes it.

Talk about sharing requiring open, closed is anathema.

Minds resonate at different frequency, as it has to be, if we want a rich diverse society. Straight equality is a simplistic measure, we're working for nothing less than global equity of opportunity.


You can't learn without interest, or teach without sharing.
Nature vs. nurture, it takes both.


Nurture gives us context, confidence, and, if we're lucky, opportunity. Let us engineer that luck. Our community has power


A friend recently said: "Which in turn ties into that prosperity doctrine bullshit where everyone who _doesn't_ succeed mustn't have tried. Their idea of meritocracy suffers a lot from survivorship bias.

Privilege in the American context seems to be about need to recognise that while they may be running in the same race, not everyone starts at the same point. Not everyone has the same number of hurdles to clear, nor are those hurdles at the same height. So the focus there is on knocking down the bigger hurdles because they infringe on freedom of opportunity, with equality of outcome as a secondary thought."

"One of the big problems with most any "true equality" is that such a truth is objectively very hard to measure - and the subjective truths vary wildly and can often be in conflict.

Models that treat people as the same when they aren't have the same potential to cause injustice as models that treat people as different where they aren't. Discussions on the "truths" of equitability, justice and fairness have been ongoing and evolving about as long as we've had societies."

--

A couple years ago I was having a Twitter exchange with some people talking about quirky collective nouns for things, like a "murder" of crows, a rabble of butterflies, a mischief of mice, a pounce of cats, a flange of baboons, a parliament of owls, a bloat of hippopotamuses, a goring of butchers, a superfluity of nuns... and I asked "Is there a collective noun for hipsters?" The usual decidedly non-hipster suspects replied with obivous and clearly wrong suggestions like "an emo of hipsters"...

A few hours later, I got an unexpected reply from someone whose Twitter handle I didn't recognise. This person said "Yes, there's a term for it, but it's pretty obscure, you probably haven't heard it". It was subtle, it was evasive, and vaguely elitist. In short, it was perfect. Before the hour was up, someone else I'd never heard of replied to us both with a picture of the t-shirt design she'd put together showing speech bubbles of our exchange and a link to buy it from her online t-shirt store. Yes, when you use services like Twitter for free, *you* are the product.

How many of you in the room would classify yourselves as hipsters? The idea of accepting and promoting that label is inherently anti-hipster. It's something usually only conferred on you by others, sort of like "she's humble" or "he's quite a good leader", or "they're a great teacher".

We ourselves decide if we want to learn. No one else can decide it for us. That personal motivation is one of the three characteristics I think are key to learning. The other two are aptitude - the cognitive ability to learn - and opportunity. Motivation and aptitude are innate - we either have them or we don't - but the last, opportunity, is at least partly external. Yes, an individual can seek out opportunity, but due to circumstance and privilege some need seek far less arduously than others.

We know that the only real solution to many of the world's existential ills - disease, overpopulation, religion, exploitation, ecological destruction - is education. In many parts of the world, often including our very own neighbourhoods, there is a great inequity of opportunity for learners. Regardless of their aptitude and motivation, the circumstances of some effectively block access to higher education. We will never be able to build traditional higher education institutions at the rate needed to meet the burgeoning demand. Even if we could meet that demand, there would still be many who due to geographic, employment, or familial circumstances could never take up that opportunity. We need to complement traditional higher education with a different approach.

One of the most miraculous and fundamental transitions in human history is the recent spread of pervasive digital communications across the globe. The Internet has created a nervous system for our planet, creating unprecedented economies of scale, and overcoming the tyranny of concentrated capital, and even the fundamental economics of scarity under which we have lived since the dawn of civilisation. The new era of Digital Abundance has allowed clever people create new communication models that visionary educators have employed to address inequity of opportunity for learners. And they can do this in "Internet time" - months, not the decades typical of "academy" - with small teams, and on a shoestring budget.

I consider myself very fortunate to have found a role with the Open Education Resource Foundation - a lean, forward looking, open institution which affords me the most rewarding and ethically pure livelihood I could imagine: creating educational opportunity for learners in a way that adapts to a rapidly changing educational expectations, and can handle exponential growth - that can achieve global "Internet scale" because that is what we need.

So I'm contradicting my earlier statement: if you use a free internet service, you are not always the product being sold. Sometimes, you're just gaining the ability to participate in an expanding ever richer global digital commons. My colleagues in the OERu and I are working to ensure that, in some rare and generally obscure and underadvertised places, those with sufficient motivation and aptitude to learn just might experience equity of opportunity.
